---

layout: post
title: Preseason Tactics - Conclusions & Beginnings
date: 2013-08-11 18:00:00

author: sosreport

--- 

With the basic shapes and concepts well understood and rehearsed by all in the first 5 games of preseason, the final 2 games have seen a remarkable variation in shapes, patterns and personnel. At least 6 changes of formation have occurred within the last 180 minutes of football. From a deep lying 433 in the first half at Real Madrid, changing in the 2nd to 4231 with advanced wingers, adding a holding midfielder for a 4141, back to a 4231 to start at Roma, changing to an attacking 433 with no fixed striker in the 2nd, briefly returning to a 4231 before finishing in a back 3 with Van Ginkel sweeping, 2 strikers, Ramires at right back and Oscar and Hazard playing through the middle. Mourinho taking the opportunity to simulate the conditions of a must win scenario, his team at 1-1 presumably heading out on imaginary away goals in the 1st knockout rounds of the Champions League, imploring his troops to pour forward until finally Lukaku gets a yard in a crowded box and pokes home a winner. Through to the next round and onto the season proper.

Players define systems, the last half against Madrid and first half against Roma saw De Bruyne, Moses, Schurrle and Torres on the pitch at the same time all of whom are, mostly by their nature, looking for the quick break. When the space is there this team must exploit it, but when there is no space this team must focus its efforts on pulling defenders apart to create it. In a way, that Chelsea conceded the 1st goal (an "unforced error" by the goalkeeper) so early gave them an excellent opportunity to practice breaking down a very competent side happy to defend a result.

In a frustrating half of football, where players rushed possession and found themselves running straight into Roma defenders, some were calling  for a much faster tempo, but perhaps speed was the problem, breeding inaccurate work around the box, making it easier for defenders to telegraph play. Particularly disastrous when fullbacks, especially Azpilicueta, were left so far advanced up the pitch. Often what's required is to keep the ball and slow the pace, tease the opponents defenders with movement off the ball that forces gaps between the lines, horizontally and vertically, which then needs to be exploited with faster passing. Injecting pace at the crucial moment.

This is something Chelsea did much better in the 2nd half with the greater composure of Oscar and Lampard as a counterpoint to the tremendous movement all over the pitch from Demba Ba, Ramires, Schurrle and then Hazard. All of this was initially in a 433 shape, underpinned by the return to a holding role for Mikel, then Van Ginkel.

Where in the first half Essien and Mikel had their moments (one particularly outstanding pass by Mikel with the outside of his right boot 50 yards down the line to start a counter attack), neither looked entirely comfortable. I can only attribute this to a deep uncertainty about which one should stay and which one should progress up the pitch, leading to hesitancy in possession which gave Roma's midfielders the extra millisecond required to set themselves and cover off attacking options.

The double pivot has worked best for Chelsea this preseason when at least one player has had a more defensive role within it, namely Essien, although Mikel and Van Ginkel have now all shown themselves more than capable of being the player that sits. It provides certainty when otherwise there is only guess work, especially when there have been 5 or more different partnerships there in 7 games.

Where the 433 used against Real Madrid got stuck deep against their aggressive pressing, Chelsea's forwards got much further up the pitch against Roma, creating more space for Ramires and Lampard to work in. Ultimately that would allow Lampard the space to get into position to score the equalising goal. It was a fantastic finish and a great example of building pressure. The most basic concept for pressurising an opposition defence comes from getting attacking players in possession in attacking areas. The better the movement off the ball, the harder the defence has to work to keep up to cover off all the options. During this one move Roma were at a loss to track both Demba Ba and Hazard back over to their right side without conceding space through the middle, which Lampard exploited expertly. With time, from the edge of the D, there are few more deadly.

Chelsea are very comfortable, natural even, in playing on the counter, seemingly regardless of how well they are playing, or which group of players are selected to play, they remain tremendously quick and accurate transitioning from defence to attack against a retreating opponent. Even if next weekend Hull don't start defensively it won't take long before teams simply stop taking risks against Chelsea and they will be forced to get better at manufacturing space. Mourinho is quite right to point to a player like Rooney for being the perfect foil for dragging defenders out of position as he moves into midfield or out wide in order to “associate” play with the attacking midfielders.

Perhaps Demba Ba has done this better than any other Chelsea striker, but he lacks any of the penetration that Lukaku provides. When Mourinho removed John Terry to introduce Lukaku, more than just the sheer overloading of numbers, Lukaku's instincts for space helped pull Roma deeper and narrower until finally they cracked and all 6'3” of Lukaku was there in 1 square yard of space in the box, Inzaghi like, to score the winner.

The great success of this preseason has been that, for the most part, the systems and tactics Jose wants to use have become so well understood, no matter how obscure, that they are secondary to the personnel selected. By this I mean that individuals now have the capacity to switch between multiple positions in multiple formations and can still focus on bringing their best to the game. There have been exceptions to this, and there are still issues of fluency that cannot be solved inside only 7 games, but the platform is set for a squad of intelligent and diligent players to build. Not only for 2013/14 either. The core of this side should still be playing together by the time Mourinho's contract is up for renewal, and perhaps like the last side he built, even outlasting his tenure and on to further glory.

Let no-one forget Johan Cruyff's prophecy: “I don't think Mourinho will achieve anything in the future either." 
